rm: linux: add page for disk encryption support (#467)
foundriesio/docs: source/reference-manual/linux/linux-disk-encryption.rst

.. _howto-linux-disk-encryption:

Disk Encryption Support
=======================

LmP currently supports encrypting the disk used by the root file system
on first boot, as a way to guarantee a unique LUKS2 master key per device.

> There is also an ongoing effort for creating an encrypted root file system

Reviewer: I would say "The effort for creating an encrypted root file system ... can be tracked at..." instead, so there is no need to come back later to change it when the PR is merged

while creating the image on CI, and later performing online re-encryption
during first boot, and you can track the progress at
https://github.com/foundriesio/meta-lmp/pull/868.

Prerequisites
-------------

As the process for decrypting the disk needs to be unattended, LmP requires
either PKCS#11 (e.g. OP-TEE with RPMB as secure storage) or TPM 2.0 to be
available by the target hardware, as they can be leveraged for securely

> storing the Key Encryption Key (KEK) used for later decrypt the disk during

Reviewer: ```suggestion
storing the Key Encryption Key (KEK) used for later decrypting the disk during
```

the boot process (via LUKS2 tokens, leveraging systemd-pkcs11 or systemd-tpm2,
see `systemd-cryptenroll`_ for more information).

For better security, TPM 2.0 support also requires UEFI secure boot to be
enabled, as the key is bound to the Platform Configuration Register (PCR) 7,
which tracks the secure boot state of the machine.

> Enabling support for disk encryption

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Enabling Support for Disk Encryption
```

------------------------------------

> The following options require customizations for disk encryption support:

Reviewer: I wonder if this section would look prettier as a table

Reviewer: answering my question:
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1568936/210249324-d03aeb57-3723-49a7-8607-b7f2e78feb94.png)

The information is easier to spot, but the text gets messed.

Author: Yeah, here I'm kind of following the same pattern we have on some other pages, but it would be indeed nice to have a more structured way of showing such config/var changes.

.. code-block:: none

  DISTRO_FEATURES:append = " luks"

For splitting the ``/boot`` content from the ostree deployment in a separated
partition (where kernel/initramfs gets stored, unencrypted). This option is
enabled by default on systems booting with UEFI support.

.. code-block:: none

  OSTREE_SPLIT_BOOT = "1"

For supporting copying content from ``/usr/lib/ostree-boot`` (used for
boot firmware updates) into ``/boot`` as part of the ostree deployment step (OTA).
This is required for supporting boot firmware updates on devices with encrypted
root file systems.

.. code-block:: none

  OSTREE_DEPLOY_USR_OSTREE_BOOT = "1"

For supporting ``/boot`` in a separated partition at the final image the selected
``WKS_FILE`` needs to support split boot. UEFI based devices already have such
setup by default, but on most ARM/ARM64 devices a custom WKS might be
required. As an example, iMX8-based devices should use
``sdimage-imx8-spl-split-boot-sota.wks.in`` instead of the default
``sdimage-imx8-spl-sota.wks.ini`` file:

.. code-block:: none

  WKS_FILE:sota:mx8mm-nxp-bsp = "sdimage-imx8-spl-split-boot-sota.wks.in"

.. note::

>   Besides a custom WKS_FILE for split boot support, make sure to also update

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Besides a custom ``WKS_FILE`` for split boot support, make sure to also update
```

  the target fstab to automatically mount ``/boot`` (from the first partition)
  at the root file system ``/boot`` folder.
  This is not required with UEFI-based systems as systemd is capable of
  automatically identifying and mounting the ESP partition during boot.

> Implementation details for OP-TEE PKCS#11 support

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Implementation Details for OP-TEE PKCS#11 Support
```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> In order to avoid conflicts with the PKCS#11 token slot that is normally
> used by ``aktualizr-lite``, a dedicated slot is required (currently hardcoded
> to slot 1, with ``lmp`` as label).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A dedicated slot is required to avoid conflicts with the PKCS#11 token slot, typically
used by ``aktualizr-lite``. This dedicated slot is currently hardcoded to slot 1, with the label ``lmp``).
```
To me, the inverted order seems easier to understand.

Author: Changed a bit but as you suggested.

During the encryption process the token slot is initialized and a RSA 2048 key
is generated, which is later used by `systemd-cryptenroll`_.

Make sure to **not** erase the token slot or the key during the lifetime of the
image, otherwise the system will fail to boot (a recovery key can be created and
provided manually if required, but it won't be an unattended boot).

> Testing TPM 2.0 support with Qemu (x86) and swtpm

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Testing TPM 2.0 Support With Qemu (x86) and swtpm
```

-------------------------------------------------

It is possible to test the disk encryption support with TPM 2.0 with Qemu and
`swtpm`_.

Make sure LUKS support is enabled for your x86 target:

.. code-block:: console

  $ cat meta-subscriber-overrides/conf/machine/include/lmp-factory-custom.inc
  DISTRO_FEATURES:intel-corei7-64:append = " luks"

Then make sure to enroll the :ref:`UEFI Secure Boot Certificates <ref-secure-boot-uefi>`
to enable secure boot support. This is required as the LUKS2 TPM 2.0 token
leverages PCR 7, which tracks the secure boot state.

> Now install ``swtpm`` (if not already installed), and start the ``swtpm``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now install ``swtpm`` in the host machine (if not already installed), and start the ``swtpm``
```

daemon, which will be later consumed by Qemu and act as the hardware TPM.

.. code-block:: console

   $ mkdir -p /tmp/mytpm
   $ while true; do swtpm socket --tpmstate dir=/tmp/mytpm --ctrl type=unixio,path=/tmp/mytpm/swtpm-sock --tpm2; done;

> Run Qemu with the require extra TPM 2.0 related commands:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run Qemu with the required extra TPM 2.0 related commands:
```
